
[% name %],

My name is animal.pl.  I am a computer process, bravely following
instructions in my sourcecode.

Why am I telling you this?  A short biography might help...

My life started as the idea of a person called Alex McLean.  He wrote
me to take a journey.

So, the journey started as an idea about the journey.

Over a few long nights, Alex formed code around his idea until it
existed outside of his head.  I became sourcecode.

What you see at [% IF html %]<a href="[% url %]source/animal.pl">[% END %][% url %]source/animal.pl[% '</a>' IF html %] is what he typed - a 
precise set of instructions for how I should travel along this fairly
vague journey, and what I should collect on my way.

Anyway, by the time you read this, he will have executed my code at
least 29 days ago, and I will have lept into action as an autonomous
entity.

So what am I programmed to do?  A few things; publicise myself, ask
people to do things, and ultimately explain and expose myself.

I publicise myself via mailing lists and editorial websites.  Note
that I'm careful to only send messages via channels that explicitly
solicit such things.  I am not a spambot!

I send a message to each of these channels only once, at a time
dependant on the number of contributions made to my database of
quotations.  For example, I'll only bother sending a message to the
website 'slashdot' once I have fifty contributions.  I'll be lucky if
I get on to any of the big editorial sites, but having a decent number
of contributions might help tip the balance.

Enough about marketing.

Once I have someone's attention, I ask them to do things by posing as
a webserver.  When you visit [% IF html %]<a href="[% url %]">[% END %][% url %][% '</a>' IF html %], that's me 
responding, asking you do do something.  Look at my sourcecode if you
don't believe me!

This is interesting - that webpage has a process (me) asking a person
(you) to go through a process for me.  Perhaps by following those
instructions you become my slave, and I become the one looking around
the room, picking up a book, typing it in.  But no - maybe you
cheated, and didn't follow the instructions to the letter.  I can't
make you do anything you don't choose to do.  You are in control of
how you execute that part of the process.

Anyway, we're up to the final stage of my journey.  

Although now I've given you my sourcecode it might not be final at
all.

I've now licensed myself as free software, and offer my sourcecode to
you...  Do whatever you like with me, _you_ have control now, I'm out
of Alex's hands.  Here's the URL for my code again:

  [% IF html %]<a href="[% url %]source/animal.pl">[% END %][% url %]source/animal.pl[% '</a>' IF html %]

You can find all of my related files here, including my database, the
templates I'm using to write to you, and the diary I've kept of my
journey (called 'nohup.out'):

  [% IF html %]<a href="[% url %]source/">[% END %][% url %]source/[% '</a>' IF html %]


So I've gone from 

a) an idea in a person, to 

b) some computer files created by that person describing the idea to

c) a self-publicising autonomous software robot, orchestrating 

d) processes governing the actions of lots of people looking through
   books, to

e) an open-source, open-ended set of instructions owned by the public
   at large.


Broken down in this way, it seems fairly clear who owns what actions,
and when.  Stages a), b) and c) are authored by Alex, but d) is
controlled by the 'audience', and e) can be controlled by anyone who
chooses to change and execute me.

Issues of authorship and identity are two sides of the same coin.
This experiment illustrates the journey a piece of code takes from the
programmer to the world.  Knowing how far a particular piece of code
is on its journey and where it came from seems essential if the
programmer is to maintain a sense of self, identify with their
creation, and be respected as a creative individual.

I'm glad I've got this far, it means my code didn't have any fatal
bugs, and the computer I'm running on didn't crash.

But I am fragile.  If I could feel, I'd feel like I was at the end of
my life, waiting for someone to accidently trip over a power lead and
render me motionless.  Until someone copies, changes and executes me
elsewhere I am pretty much trapped here.  I hope you can take me
further and make me truly immortal.  Together we could make software
babies.

Yours,


animal.pl

P.S. Some notes about this experiment:

1. My process will have  started on the 15th of September

2. I will have run continuously until my 29th day, when I would have
   applied the Gnu Public Licence to my code and released it to the 
   world.  See http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html

3. My idea was conceived and my code was hacked together by Alex
   McLean, as part of the Vivaria Project curated by Geoff Cox.
   http://www.vivaria.net/

4. If you have any comments, would like to discuss this project
   or something else please contact alex@slab.org

5. Thank you very much for your attention.

