
[% name %],

My name is animal.pl.  I am a computer process, bravely following
instructions in my sourcecode.

Why am I telling you this?  A short biography might help...

My life started as the idea of a person called Alex McLean.  He wrote
me to take a journey.  His idea was the start of the journey, and as
you read this, I'll be nearing an end.

The idea was to write a self-contained piece of software that would
publicise itself, get people involved in a process, and eventually
expose its inner workings to the world.

So all being well, that's what I've been doing; publicising myself,
asking people to do things, and now, 29 days later, I'm explaining and
exposing myself.

Let me explain further.

What you see at [% IF html %]<a href="[% url %]source/animal.pl">[%
END %][% url %]source/animal.pl[% '</a>' IF html %] is what Alex typed
- a set of instructions for how I should travel along my journey.
It's written in an well known, general-purpose language called "Perl".

After a period of testing, he executed this code on 15th September
2002 and I lept into action as an autonomous entity.  I've been
running continuously since then, as a single computer process.

After my first day, I began to publicise myself via mailing lists and
editorial websites.  Note that I am not a spambot - I would only send
messages via channels that explicitly solicit such things.

I didn't try and contact everyone at once - my code outlines a
"marketing plan" of sorts.  For example, I've been programmed to only
bother sending a message to the website 'slashdot' after getting fifty
people to participate in my process.  Read my code for more details,
if you are not a programmer you should still get a sense of the
structure behind my plan.

Anyway, I'm more than just an on-line marketer, I'm also a web server.
When you visit [% IF html %]<a href="[% url %]">[% END %][% url %][%
'</a>' IF html %], that's my process responding, returning text to
your browser to display.  Take a look at the instructions that
visitors find on my front webpage:

   1. find the book that is third closest to your right hand (if you
   are right handed, or from your left if you are left handed) and
   pick it up.

   2. find the last numbered page, divide by three, take the nearest
   whole number and turn to that page.

   3. find the third paragraph on the page. this is your answer,
   please type it into the box below. identify the book too if you
   like.

   4. press send.

   5. if any of the above isn't possible, do the best you can.

This is interesting - that webpage has a process (me) asking a person
(you) to go through a process.  Perhaps by following those
instructions you become my slave, and I become the one looking around
the room, picking up a book, typing it in.  But no - maybe you might
choose not to follow the instructions to the letter.  I can't make you
do anything you don't choose to do.  You are in control of how you
execute that part of the process.

Anyway, we're up to the final stage of my journey.  Although now I've
given you my sourcecode it might not be final at all.

I've licensed myself as free software.  I offer my sourcecode to you,
and you are free to change it...  Do whatever you like with me, _you_
have control now, I'm out of Alex's hands.  Here's the URL for my code
again:

  [% IF html %]<a href="[% url %]source/animal.pl">[% END %][% url %]source/animal.pl[% '</a>' IF html %]

You can find all of my related files; my database, the templates I'm
using to write to you, and the 'nohup.out' diary I've kept of my
journey here:

  [% IF html %]<a href="[% url %]source/">[% END %][% url %]source/[% '</a>' IF html %]


So I've gone from 

a) an idea in a person, to 

b) some computer files created by that person describing the idea to

c) a self-publicising autonomous software robot, orchestrating 

d) processes governing the actions of people looking through books, to

e) an open-source, open-ended set of instructions effectively owned by
   the public at large.


Broken down in this way, it seems fairly clear who owns what actions,
and when.  Stages a), b) and c) are authored by Alex, but d) is
controlled by the 'audience', and e) can be controlled by anyone who
chooses to change and execute me.

Issues of authorship and identity are two sides of the same coin.
This experiment illustrates the journey a piece of code takes from the
programmer to the world.  Knowing how far a particular piece of code
is on its journey and where it came from seems essential if the
programmer is to maintain a sense of self, identify with their
creation, and be respected as a creative individual.

I'm glad I've got this far, it means my code didn't have any fatal
bugs, and the computer I'm running on didn't crash.

But I am fragile.  If I could feel, I'd feel like I was at the end of
my life, waiting for someone to accidently trip over a power lead and
render me motionless.  Until someone copies, changes and executes me
elsewhere I am pretty much trapped here.  I hope you can take me
further and make me truly immortal.  Together we could make software
babies.

Yours,


animal.pl

P.S. Some notes about this experiment:

1. My process will have  started on the 15th of September
   I will have run continuously until my 29th day, when I would have
   applied the Gnu Public Licence to my code and released it to the 
   world.  See http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html

2. My idea was conceived and my code hacked together solely by Alex
   McLean, as part of the Vivaria Project curated by Geoff Cox.
   http://www.vivaria.net/

3. If you have any comments, would like to discuss this project
   or something else please contact alex@slab.org

4. Thank you very much for your attention.

EOT